MTM-64360 User guide for MQTT Service Pulsar client (#3642)
Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs: content/device-integration/mqtt-service-bundle/pulsar-client.md

Reviewer: **thought:** Now that we're exposing a reliable messaging system more explicitly, used to communicate with another (potentially) reliable messaging service, I wonder if there's scope for confusion. As a user I might think that when I publish a message to Pulsar, when I get an acknowledgement from it it means that the MQTT device has acknowledged it. A similar delusion in the other direction perhaps.

Somewhere we might want to disillusion them of this, and be clear about it being decoupled. And another consequence of decoupling is a lack of errors - publishing to a non-existent MQTT topic or device via Pulsar will just complete and drop the message into a blackhole.

Author: Yeah, I already had to explain this exact point to some field folks so it should be mentioned in here and probably also in the FAQ.

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/a5377068aa2f51a2a37c21c623443b1a675fd761

---

{{< product-c8y-iot >}} microservices and external applications can consume messages published by devices connected to the MQTT Service, and publish messages back to those devices.
To do this, your microservice or external application will connect to the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Messaging Service, a modified deployment of [Apache Pulsar](https://pulsar.apache.org/), and use the Pulsar protocol to publish and consume MQTT messages.
The diagram below shows the important interfaces and data flows used when interacting with the MQTT Service through Pulsar.

**(DIAGRAM GOES HERE)**

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
We define the term _MQTT Service messaging client_ as a software component that interacts with the MQTT Service through Pulsar.
It can be deployed either as a microservice hosted by the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform, or as part of an external application hosted outside the platform.
In this documentation, it will be referred to simply as a _client_.
Where the implementation or behaviour of a client is different depending on where it is hosted, those differences will be clearly documented.
{{< /c8y-admon-info>}}

### Connecting to the Messaging Service

> To connect your client to the Messaging Service, you will need to use a [Pulsar client library](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/4.0.x/client-libraries/).

Reviewer: Is it definitely ok/recommended to use a v4 client against the v3 server deployment we use?

Reviewer: Oh, never mind, they have a strong documented guarantee

        final String pulsarUrl = System.getenv("C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR");
        final String tenantId = args[0];
        final String username = args[1];
        final String password = args[2];

        // Create and configure the basic authentication credentials object.
        final AuthenticationBasic basicAuth = new AuthenticationBasic();
        basicAuth.configure(MessageFormat.format("'{'\"userId\":\"{0}/{1}\",\"password\":\"{2}\"'}'", tenantId, username, password));

        // Create a Pulsar client using the basic authentication credentials.
        // The client will not try to connect and authenticate immediately.
        final PulsarClient client = PulsarClient.builder()
            .serviceUrl(pulsarUrl)
            .authentication(basicAuth)
            .build();
    }
}
```

### Message payloads and properties

Pulsar messages consist of a _payload_ and set of _properties_.

The payload is a sequence of zero or more bytes, identical to the payload of the MQTT `PUBLISH` message that the Pulsar message corresponds to.
It is the client's responsiblity to understand the format of the payloads produced and accepted by the MQTT devices it communicates with.

> Message properties are name-value pairs, where both the name and the value are text strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pulsar message properties are name-value pairs, where both the name and the value are text strings.
```
Now, I'm not suggesting using "(Pulsar,MQTT) message" everywhere, but the text needs to periodically reassert the context. I'll leave it to your judgement how often we do that.

| `persistent`  | Indicates that this is a persistent topic that will be preserved by the Messaging Service across component failures and restarts, to provide "at least once" delivery guarantees |
| `<tenant>`    | The Pulsar tenant id, which will match the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} tenant id                                                                                                     |
| `mqtt`        | The Pulsar namespace within the tenant, which will always be `mqtt` for the MQTT Service                                                                                         |
| `from-device` | The Pulsar topic within the namespace, which will always be `from-device` for message from devices connected to the MQTT Service                                                 | 

Your client will only be able to consume from this topic if the authenticated user has the "read" permission on the "Mqtt service messaging topics" role.
The client will not be able to consume from any other topic.

The client identifier of the device that published the messages, and the MQTT topic it was published on, can be obtained from the message properties `client` and `channel` as described above.

> This means that your client **must** consume every message published by every device connected to the MQTT Service for the tenant, event those you are not interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that your client **must** consume every message published by every device connected to the MQTT Service for the tenant, even those you are not interested in.
```

                final String topic = message.getProperty("channel");
                System.out.println(MessageFormat.format("Received message from MQTT device {0} on MQTT topic {1}", clientId, topic));
                System.out.println(MessageFormat.format("Message payload: {0}", message.getValue()));
                System.out.println(MessageFormat.format("Message properties: {0}", message.getProperties()));
                try {
                    // Acknowledge the message
                    consumer.acknowledge(message);
                } catch (PulsarClientException e) {
                    e.printStackTrace();
                }
            }
        };

        // Create a Pulsar consumer on the from-device topic for the tenant.
        // This will use the listener defined above to process each message.
        final Consumer<String> consumer = client.newConsumer(Schema.STRING)
            .topic(MessageFormat.format("persistent://{0}/mqtt/from-device", tenantId))
            .subscriptionName("demoSubscription")
            .messageListener(listener)
            .subscribe();
```

### Publishing messages to MQTT devices

> * All messages to MQTT devices are published on a single Pulsar topic, `persistent://<tenant>/mqtt/to-device`

Reviewer: "are published" reads like it's the system doing it for us. Suggest something more like "should be published" or "You will publish ... "

Author: Re-written much more verbosely.

* The topic to publish to must be set using the `topic` message property
* Because MQTT Service devices are isolated from each other, it is also necessary to set the `clientid` property to the id of the target device

> * However, if you want to publish the message to all devices that are subscribed to the named topic, leave the `clientid` property empty (or missing?)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Because MQTT Service devices are isolated from each other, it is also necessary to set the `client` property to the id of the target device
* However, if you want to publish the message to all devices that are subscribed to the named topic, leave the `client` property empty (or missing?)
```

Author: I think I re-wrote this section completely, hopefully it's OK now.

> * However, if you want to publish the message to all devices that are subscribed to the named topic, leave the `clientid` property empty (or missing?)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* However, if you want to publish the message to all devices that are subscribed to the named topic, do not set the `client` property.
```
I'll update this in the relevant ticket.

Author: To be fair, I made that up without asking anyone. We need to agree in the team what the behaviour should be and align the documentation with the implementation. I'm going to leave it open as a TBD for the full review.

* To publish to the topic, create a Pulsar Producer, and construct Pulsar Messages with the appropriate properties and payload
<p>

* Code snippet showing how to publish

> ### Best practices to ensure reliable message delivery {#reliable-delivery-best-practices}

Reviewer: Direction is ambiguous, which is significant as we don't currently deal with the other direction.
```suggestion
### Best practices to ensure reliable message delivery from devices {#reliable-delivery-best-practices}
```

> * Topics have a "backlog quota" that affects the number of unacknowledged messages that can be outstanding

Reviewer: "Topics" ... you know what I'm going to say :-)

Author: Yeah, I think I made this clear enough in the text (remember you were just reviewing an outline) but you can nitpick it in the full review.

---
weight: 30
layout: redirect
title: Connecting microservices and applications
---

{{< product-c8y-iot >}} microservices and external applications can consume messages published by devices connected to the MQTT Service, and publish messages back to those devices.
To do this, your microservice or external application will connect to the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Messaging Service, a modified deployment of [Apache Pulsar](https://pulsar.apache.org/), and use the Pulsar protocol to publish and consume MQTT messages.
The diagram below shows the important interfaces and data flows used when interacting with the MQTT Service through Pulsar.

> <p align="center" width="100%">

Reviewer: **suggestion:** I think this wonderful diagram should be moved/condensed/changed+reused for Overview / Architecture - the diagram there is very legacy-oriented. Maybe now, or maybe in a later ticket, not sure.

Author: I broadly agree, although I'm wondering if some of the details could be simplified for a top-level architecture diagram, and if IDP and/or core should be explicitly mentioned on the RHS of the diagram? What do you think?

Reviewer: Too early to mention IDP I think! I suppose we don't want to over-egg "Microservice or external client" in the Overview, but maybe "Cumulocity platform and customer application" would be a good substitute.

Other simplifications are to remove the smaller blocks in the middle of the flow like "Device 1 Topic A" and "Pulsar from-device topic". Then we're still giving a good overview, without being overly zoomed-in.

Author: Thanks. Will keep all this in mind when I re-work the Overview.

>     <img width="80%" src="/images/mqtt-service/mqtt-service-pulsar-connections.svg" alt="MQTT Service Pulsar connections">

Reviewer: **praise:** Wonderful diagram, just the right amount of fiction to help a user model it in their mind.

The client will not be able to publish to any other topic.

Messages published to the `to-device` topic are routed to connected MQTT devices using the two required message properties:

| Property name | Purpose                                                              |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `clientID`    | Client identifier of the MQTT device that should receive the message |
| `topic`       | Name of the MQTT topic that the message should be published to       |

If the `topic` property is empty or missing, the message will not be pulished to any MQTT client.
The message will only be published to a client with an active subscription to the named MQTT topic.
The message will only be published to a client that is connected at the time the MQTT Service processes the published message.

In order to enforce device-level isolation, the message will be published **only** to the specific MQTT client identified by the `clientID` message property, provided that client has an active subscription to the relevant MQTT topic.

> If the `clientID` property is empty, the message will be sent to **all** connected MQTT clients with active subscriptions to the MQTT topic.

Reviewer: Or at least that's what https://cumulocity.atlassian.net/browse/MTM-64283 says.

```suggestion
If the `clientID` property is missing, the message will be sent to **all** connected MQTT clients with active subscriptions to the MQTT topic.
```

Author: Hmm, so it does. In that case, what should the behaviour be if the property is present but with an empty value, which I believe is allowed by the Pulsar protocol? Should that be treated the same as a missing property, or as an error? (and in that case how do we respond - the only real option we have is to silently drop the message, unless we want to introduce a DLQ or similar). I don't have a strong opinion other than that the doc should match the implementation.

Reviewer: Just the same as any other incorrect clientID. Empty is just a zero-length string that somebody has to have explicitly set:
* Properties are `{...}` - goes to all clients
* Properties are `{"clientID":"realclient"}` goes to one client
* Properties are `{"clientID":"nonexistentclient"}` gets dropped on the floor
* Properties are `{"clientID":""}` gets dropped on the floor (why did you do that to yourself? Stop hitting yourself.)

Author: Makes sense. Clarified in https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/7b189f58560a4414d41ee4ff61c9b544c6bc2676.

Currently, only one-way TLS is supported; that is, the server will provide a certificate that can be verified by the client, but client certificates cannot be used.
Implementing an external application client so that it reads the Pulsar URL from the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` environment variable will make it easier to develop client that can be deployed as either a microservice or an external application.

#### Pulsar authentication

Authentication credentials identify both the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} tenant and the user within that tenant.
Currently, only "basic" (username and password) authentication is supported for clients connecting to the Messaging Service through Pulsar.
For a microservice client, you should use the credentials of the per-tenant [service user](/microservice-sdk/general-aspects/#users-and-roles) that will be passed to the microservice when the tenant is subscribed to it.
For an external application user, you can use the credentials of any tenant user with the appropriate authorization roles assigned, as described below.
The username must be in the form `<tenant>/<user>` where `<tenant>` is the tenant id, and `<user>` is a user within that tenant.

> 

Reviewer 2: **_todo:_** As discussed offline, document the implications of enabling TFA for non-Microservice users, vis-à-vis the `devices` global role as the mitigating factor.
https://cumulocity.com/docs/authentication/basic-settings/#tfa-settings

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/8928289452867fad808de90b2ec0d82b9aa63be9

Messages that are published while the client is disconnected will be available for it to consume when it reconnects.
After consuming each message, the client **must** explicitly acknowledge it.
Acknowledging a message tells the Messaging Service that the client has no further interest in it, allowing the message to be discarded.
See the section on [best practices](#reliable-delivery-best-practices) below for more information on managing durable subscriptions correctly.

#### Example code

The code snippet below shows how to use the Pulsar Java client library to consume messages from the MQTT Service `from-device` topic.
It extends the previous example that set up the connection to the Pulsar server.

To consume messages from the topic, your client should create a Pulsar `Consumer` and subscribe it to the topic.
The consumer should register a `MessageListener` callback that will be called whenever a new message arrives on the topic.
The `MessageListener` implementation shows how to access the payload and properties of the received messages.

> For simplicity and clarity, the example assumes that message payloads are simple text strings.

Reviewer 3: MQTT Service always uses `<byte[]>` producer, so I would stick with it on the consumer side too (it may not even work as the producer schema is always `<byte[]>` and the consumer tries to use `<String>`).

Reviewer 2: Yes, `<String>` does not work in our case.

Author: It actually did work, but probably only by good luck. Anyway I agree that we should use `byte[]` and `Schema.BYTES` to avoid any confusion especially if users copy/paste the example as they probably will. The code snippets are still wrong - they will be fixed when the example is approved and copy-pasted in here.

https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/382f350e65557ce4351ce3bd0ee8ff0f68962b6a

```java
        // Create a simple message listener that will log some details of
        // each message received.
        final MessageListener<String> listener = new MessageListener<String>() {
            @Override
            public void received(Consumer<String> consumer, Message<String> message) {

>                 final String clientId = message.getProperty("client");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                final String clientId = message.getProperty("clientID");
```

Author: All the code snippets will be updated after https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/cumulocity-examples/pull/158 is approved, but I will apply these suggestions anyway to avoid confusing PS folks who are already using this doc.

>                 final String topic = message.getProperty("channel");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                final String topic = message.getProperty("topic");
```

The components of the URL should be interpreted as described in [Consuming messages from MQTT devices](#consuming-messages-from-mqtt-devices) above.

Your client will only be able to publish to this topic if the authenticated user has the "update" permission on the "Mqtt service messaging topics" role.
The client will not be able to publish to any other topic.

Messages published to the `to-device` topic are routed to connected MQTT devices using the two required message properties:

| Property name | Purpose                                                              |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `clientID`    | Client identifier of the MQTT device that should receive the message |
| `topic`       | Name of the MQTT topic that the message should be published to       |

If the `topic` property is empty or missing, the message will not be published to any MQTT client.
The message will only be published to a client with an active subscription to the named MQTT topic.
The message will only be published to a client that is connected at the time the MQTT Service processes the published message.

> Successfully publishing a message to the Messaging Service does **not** mean that the message has been successfully delivered to any MQTT device.

Reviewer 3: Should we say something about QoS to avoid future questions?
AFAIR from Anthony's PR, currently we are pushing the message with the same QoS level as it was in the original subscription message from the device.

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/382f350e65557ce4351ce3bd0ee8ff0f68962b6a

Broadcast publishing is potentially expensive when there are many MQTT clients connected.
It may also lead to messages being received by unexpected devices.
Therefore, it should be used sparingly and only when there is a genuine application requirement to publish the same message to every device subscribed to a given topic.

#### Message keys {#message-keys}

To facilitate efficient delivery and correct ordering of messages sent to MQTT devices, clients **must** also set the _key_ of a Pulsar message published to the `to-device` topic.
The key should be set as follows:

* When the `clientID` message property is set, the key should have the same value as this property.
* When the `clientID` message property is **not** set, the key should have the same value as the `topic` message property.

> {{< c8y-admon-info >}}

Reviewer 3: Probably not needed
```suggestion
```

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/382f350e65557ce4351ce3bd0ee8ff0f68962b6a

{{< /c8y-admon-info >}}

#### Example code

The code snippet below shows how to use the Pulsar Java client library to publish messages to the MQTT Service `to-device` topic.
It extends the previous examples that set up the connection to the Pulsar server and created a message consumer.

To publish messages to the topic, your client should first create a Pulsar `Producer` associated with the topic.
Then, the `Producer` can be used to create new `Message` objects that will be published to the topic.
The example code shows how to correctly set the message properties and message key for messages targeted at a single device, and for "broadcast" messages.
The example continues to assume that message payloads are simple text strings, and omits most error-handling code for clarity.

```java
        // Create a Pulsar producer on the to-device topic for the tenant.
        final Producer<String> producer = client.newProducer(Schema.STRING)
            .topic(MessageFormat.format("persistent://{0}/mqtt/to-device", tenantId))
            .create();
        System.out.println("Created Pulsar producer");

        // Publish a message to a single MQTT device
        producer.newMessage()

>             .property("client", "demoClient")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            .property("clientID", "demoClient")
```

>             .property("channel", "demoTopic")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            .property("topic", "demoTopic")
```

            .key("demoClient")
            .send();
        System.out.println("Sent message to single device");
        
        // Publish a message to all MQTT devices subscribed to a topic
        producer.newMessage()

>             .property("client", "")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            .property("clientID", "")
```

>             .property("channel", "demoTopic")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            .property("topic", "demoTopic")
```

If the backlog quota limit for the Pulsar `from-device` topic is reached, new MQTT `PUBLISH` packets from connected devices will be rejected.
If the `PUBLISH` packet was sent with QoS level 0, the message will be lost.
If the `PUBLISH` packet was sent with QoS level 1, the behaviour depends on the MQTT protocol version used by the device:
* For devices using MQTT version 3, the device will be disconnected.
* For devices using MQTT version 5, the device will receive a `PUBACK` packet with reason code `0x97`, _Quota exceeded_.

If the backlog quota limit for the Pulsar `to-device` topic is reached, clients calling the `Producer.send()` method, or its equivalent in the Pulsar library used by the client, will receive an appropriate exception or error response from the client library.

#### Message time-to-live

Any undelivered messages will be automatically deleted if they have been on the backlog for longer than the _time to live (TTL) limit_.
This policy helps to limit overall resource usage and reduces the need to process outdated data after a prolonged disconnection of a consumer.

> No message will ever be deleted from the backlog unless it reaches its TTL limit.

Reviewer 3: Should we add something like this for more clarity?
```suggestion
No message will ever be deleted from the backlog unless it reaches its TTL limit or it has been processed by the MQTT Service.
```

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/382f350e65557ce4351ce3bd0ee8ff0f68962b6a

---
weight: 30
layout: redirect
title: Connecting microservices and applications
---

{{< product-c8y-iot >}} microservices and external applications can consume messages published by devices connected to the MQTT Service, and publish messages back to those devices.

> To do this, your microservice or external application will connect to the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Messaging Service, a modified deployment of [Apache Pulsar](https://pulsar.apache.org/), and use the Pulsar protocol to publish and consume MQTT messages.

Reviewer: It's true to say that it is indeed modified from upstream, but I don't know if that information is more helpful than potentially alarming
```suggestion
To do this, your microservice or external application will connect to the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Messaging Service, a deployment of [Apache Pulsar](https://pulsar.apache.org/), and use the Pulsar protocol to publish and consume MQTT messages.
```

The diagram below shows the important interfaces and data flows used when interacting with the MQTT Service through Pulsar.

<p align="center" width="100%">
    <img width="80%" src="/images/mqtt-service/mqtt-service-pulsar-connections.svg" alt="MQTT Service Pulsar connections">
</p>

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
We define the term _MQTT Service messaging client_ as a software component that interacts with the MQTT Service through Pulsar.
It can be deployed either as a microservice hosted by the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform, or as part of an external application hosted outside the platform.
In this documentation, it will be referred to simply as a _client_.
Where the implementation or behaviour of a client is different depending on where it is hosted, those differences will be clearly documented.
{{< /c8y-admon-info>}}

The MQTT Service implements _device isolation_, meaning that MQTT devices connected to the MQTT Service **cannot** communicate directly with each other using the MQTT protocol.

> All inter-device communication will be managed by the client, as shown in the diagram.

Reviewer: Reduces the implication that there's any kind of magic automatic routing happening
```suggestion
All inter-device communication can/must be managed by the client, as shown in the diagram.
```

Author: How about "All inter-device communication must be managed explicitly by the client, as shown in the diagram"?

Reviewer: Yeah, that'd be great.

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/7111a538881cf9b7646e41f88365422b6c1227a0

This documentation does not cover the publish-subscribe messaging concepts and architecture implemented by Pulsar, nor any features of the Pulsar client libraries beyond those needed to implement a simple MQTT Service client.
To learn more about those subjects, please refer to the [Pulsar product documentation](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/4.0.x/).

### Connecting to the Messaging Service

To connect your client to the Messaging Service, you will need:
1. A [Pulsar client library](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/4.0.x/client-libraries/).
2. The URL of the Messaging Service (Pulsar broker) in your {{< product-c8y-iot >}} environment.
3. Credentials for a user in your tenant with permission to access MQTT Service data on the Messaging Service.

> Each of these pre-requisities is explained in detail below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these prerequisites is explained in detail below.
```

#### Pulsar client library

> Open-source Pulsar client libraries are available for a number of different languages and protcols.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Open-source Pulsar client libraries are available for a number of different languages and protocols.
```

Integration with the MQTT Service will not require using any advanced Pulsar features that may only be available in the latest version of the server.

{{< c8y-admon-caution >}}
Currently only "basic" (username/password) authentication is supported for clients connecting to the Messaging Service through Pulsar.
Therefore, you must ensure that your chosen Pulsar client library supports this authentication scheme.
{{< /c8y-admon-caution >}}

#### Pulsar URL

For a microservice client, the URL should be obtained from the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` [environment variable](/microservice-sdk/general-aspects/#environment-variables) that will be passed to the microservice when it starts running.
For an external application client, the URL has the general form `pulsar+ssl://<tenant_domain>:6651/`, where `<tenant_domain>` is the domain of your {{< product-c8y-iot >}} tenant, for example `my-tenant.cumulocity.com`.
As implied by the `pulsar+ssl` protocol name, all external application client connections will use SSL/TLS security.
Currently, only one-way TLS is supported; that is, the server will provide a certificate that can be verified by the client, but client certificates cannot be used.

> Implementing an external application client so that it reads the Pulsar URL from the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` environment variable will make it easier to develop client that can be deployed as either a microservice or an external application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Implementing an external application client so that it reads the Pulsar URL from the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` environment variable will make it easier to develop a client that can be deployed as either a microservice or an external application.
```

For microservice clients, the required permissions should be added to the `requiredRoles` section of the [microservice manifest](/microservice-sdk/general-aspects/#microservice-manifest), which will grant the requested permissions to the per-tenant service user.
For example:

```json
{
    "apiVersion": "v2",
    "name": "my-mqtt-service-client",
    "version": "1.0.0",
    ...
    "requiredRoles": [
        "ROLE_MQTT_SERVICE_MESSAGING_TOPICS_READ",
        "ROLE_MQTT_SERVICE_MESSAGING_TOPICS_UPDATE"
    ],
    ...
}
```

For external application clients, the required permissions should be configured for the authenticating user through the [Administration application](/standard-tenant/managing-permissions/).

We recommend only assigning the minimum permissions needed for your client to operate.
For example, if your microservice only needs to consume but not publish messages, you should not include the `ROLE_MQTT_SERVICE_MESSAGING_TOPICS_UPDATE` permission in the manifest.

#### Example code

The code snippet below shows how to use the Pulsar Java client library to connect to the Messaging Service with basic authentication.

> It assumes that the Pulsar URL is in the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` environment variable and that the tenant, username and password are provided on the command line.

Reviewer: This feels like quite a weird combination to me - some of your details as if you're a microservice, some as if you're an app. I get that we want to cover both, but doing it like this made me scratch my head (after taking off my "new user" hat, obviously).

I suppose we could have this sample work in both environments, e.g. `if C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR then use C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR and C8Y_USER and ...  else args` . But maybe that's too verbose. Honestly, I don't know the right answer!

Author: The example is explicitly not a microservice (to keep it as simple as possible) so really the only change I could make is to move the URL to the args. Is that worth doing at this stage? I'd rather not as it would mean changing the example and its documentation, but if you feel strongly about it I can do that.

Reviewer: I don't feel that strongly - it's weird, but not incorrect.

> It assumes that the Pulsar URL is in the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` environment variable and that the tenant, username and password are provided on the command line.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It assumes that the Pulsar URL is in the `C8Y_BASEURL_PULSAR` environment variable and that the tenant identifier, username and password are provided on the command line.
```

I think the comma is not required here.

Author: The comma was required - there are 3 separate command line args expected by the example. However it's much clearer if we say "tenant identifier" rather than just "tenant", so a good catch regardless.

Note that the client library will not actually attempt to connect to the Pulsar server immediately when the `PulsarClient` object is created.

> In the interests of brevity and clarity, this example does no error handling.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the interest of brevity and clarity, this example does no error handling.
```

|-------------------------------------------|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `topic`                                   | YES               | String                                                                | MQTT topic name                                      |
| `clientID`                                | YES<sup>(1)</sup> | String                                                                | MQTT client identifier                               |
| `tx.payloadFormatIndicator`<sup>(2)</sup> | NO                | Single byte with two permitted values, encoded as strings "0" and "1" | MQTT v5 Payload Format Indicator                     |
| `tx.contentType`                          | NO                | String                                                                | MQTT v5 Content Type                                 |
| `tx.responseTopic`                        | NO                | String                                                                | MQTT v5 Response Topic                               |

> | `tx.correlationData`                      | NO                | Sequence of bytes, encoded as a Base64 string                         | MQTT v5 Correlator Data                              |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `tx.correlationData`                      | NO                | Sequence of bytes, encoded as a Base64 string                         | MQTT v5 Correlation Data                              |
```

Apama til you die?

| `tx.userProperties.<name>`                | NO                | String                                                                | MQTT v5 User Property with name `name`<sup>(3)</sup> |

Notes:

> 1. The `clientID` property can be omitted from a published message only in special case of a _broadcast_ message, described below in [broadcast messages](#broadcast-messages)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. The `clientID` property can be omitted from a published message only in special case of a _broadcast_ message, described below in [broadcast messages](#broadcast-messages).
```

2. The `tx.` prefix indicates that a property is specific to a _transport_, in this case the MQTT Service.
   Other transports will define their own transport-specific properties, but all transports will use `topic` and `clientID`.
3. The MQTT version 5 specification allows a message to include more than one user property with the same name.
   This feature is **not** supported by the MQTT Service.
   If a device publishes a message containing multiple user properties with the same name, only one of these will be copied into the Pulsar message.
   It is undefined which property will be copied.

### Consuming messages from MQTT devices {#consuming-messages-from-mqtt-devices}

> All messages published by devices connected to the MQTT Service for a given tenant will be published to a _single_ Pulsar topic, identified by the URL `persistent://<tenant>/mqtt/from-device`.

Reviewer: As a dumb user who used to get confused between domain and id:
```suggestion
All messages published by devices connected to the MQTT Service for a given tenant will be published to a _single_ Pulsar topic, identified by the URL `persistent://<tenantID>/mqtt/from-device`.
```
(I think we also call it `tenantID` in other text in the MQTT service guide)

Author: Good catch, and there were a few more places where I could make the same change: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/19b351c2eaf6471549d769a14c5269aa6994e404

| `from-device` | The Pulsar topic within the namespace, which will always be `from-device` for message from devices connected to the MQTT Service                                                 | 

Your client will only be able to consume from this topic if the authenticated user has the "read" permission on the "Mqtt service messaging topics" role.
The client will not be able to consume from any other topic.

The client identifier of the device that published the messages, and the MQTT topic it was published on, can be obtained from the message properties `clientID` and `topic` as described above.
This means that your client **must** consume every message published by every device connected to the MQTT Service for the tenant, even those you are not interested in.
Messages that are not of interest to the client can simply be acknowledged without further processing.

{{< c8y-admon-caution >}}
Your client **must** be trusted to safely handle every message published by every device connected to the MQTT Service in your tenant.

> If untrusted users have access to your tenant, these users should **not** be permitted to upload microservices, nor to connect external application clients to the MQTT Service.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If untrusted users have access to your tenant, these users should **not** be permitted to upload microservices, nor to connect external application clients to the Messaging Service.
```

Right?

This recommendation also applies in the case of multiple customers, who do not mutually trust each other, sharing a single tenant.
{{< /c8y-admon-caution >}}

> #### Durable subscriptions and acknowledgement

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Durable subscriptions and message acknowledgement
```

Author: I didn't entirely agree with this one as it might it read like the acknowledgements themselves were durable. I hope my slight adjustment is OK?

Subscribing a consumer to a topic establishes a _durable subscription_ to the topic.
This means that the Messaging Service will retain messages published to the topic until they have been delivered to, and acknowledged by, a client.
The subscription will remain until it is explicitly deleted; most importantly, it will not be removed simply because the client is not currently running.
Messages that are published while the client is disconnected will be available for it to consume when it reconnects.
After consuming each message, the client **must** explicitly acknowledge it.
Acknowledging a message tells the Messaging Service that the client has no further interest in it, allowing the message to be discarded.
See the section on [best practices](#reliable-delivery-best-practices) below for more information on managing durable subscriptions correctly.

#### Example code

The code snippet below shows how to use the Pulsar Java client library to consume messages from the MQTT Service `from-device` topic.

> It extends the previous example that set up the connection to the Pulsar server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It extends the previous example that showed how to connect to the Messaging Service.
```

EH! This might be too picky you kind of say you don't connect to the Pulsar server in the above example code. Yes you do prepare the connection, but don't do the connection. (sorry)

Reviewer 4: Later you use 'set up the connection to the Pulsar server'
perhaps the 'tagline' of each example should be more prominent then easier to refer to in each subsequent example. 
Example code - Set up the connection to the Pulsar server
Example code - Create a message consumer
Example code - Produce a message

Author: Good idea, I will do that.

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/5bb2e153aeabbe7dafe2a303d7740c6cc017800d

To consume messages from the topic, your client should create a Pulsar `Consumer` and subscribe it to the topic.
The consumer should register a `MessageListener` callback that will be called whenever a new message arrives on the topic.
The `MessageListener` implementation shows how to access the payload and properties of the received messages.
For simplicity, the application messages in the example are simple text strings.
However, the payload of the Pulsar message will always be an array of bytes, that must be converted to the format used by the application.

```java
        // Create a simple message listener that will log some details of
        // each message received.

>         final MessageListener<String> listener = new MessageListener<String>() {

Reviewer 2: **_question:_** I believe this is yet to be fixed as per this [comment](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642#discussion_r2379768121), right?  Same for example-code-3 (producer one) too.

Author: > **_question:_** I believe this is yet to be fixed as per this [comment](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642#discussion_r2379768121), right? Same for example-code-3 (producer one) too.

Yes exactly. I need to run the sample against an environment with the tenant isolation changes to be completely sure that works, then I can merge it and update all the code snippets in this PR.

Author: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/3eebfaade1bbd2994a48e40fbb42c3810b7f052d

### Publishing messages to MQTT devices

Any messages that your client wants to send to devices connected to the MQTT Service for a given tenant must be published to a _single_ Pulsar topic, identified by the URL `persistent://<tenantID>/mqtt/to-device`.
The components of the URL should be interpreted as described in [Consuming messages from MQTT devices](#consuming-messages-from-mqtt-devices) above.

Your client will only be able to publish to this topic if the authenticated user has the "update" permission on the "Mqtt service messaging topics" role.
The client will not be able to publish to any other topic.

Messages published to the `to-device` topic are routed to connected MQTT devices using the two required message properties:

| Property name | Purpose                                                              |
|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `clientID`    | Client identifier of the MQTT device that should receive the message |
| `topic`       | Name of the MQTT topic that the message should be published to       |

If the `topic` property is empty or missing, the message will not be published to any MQTT client.

> The message will only be published to a client with an active subscription to the named MQTT topic.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The message will only be published to a device with an active subscription to the named MQTT topic.
```

I think client and device is interchanged in these paragraphs, might need a general once over to standardize.

Again, the example assumes that the application messages are simple text strings, that must be converted to the byte array expected by the MQTT Service.
For clarity, most error-handling code is omitted from the example.
See [Handling Messaging Service errors](#handling-messaging-service-errors) for advice on dealing with errors in a production client.

```java
        // Create a Pulsar producer on the to-device topic for the tenant.
        final Producer<String> producer = client.newProducer(Schema.STRING)
            .topic(MessageFormat.format("persistent://{0}/mqtt/to-device", tenantId))
            .create();
        System.out.println("Created Pulsar producer");

        // Publish a message to a single MQTT device
        producer.newMessage()
            .property("clientID", "demoClient")
            .property("topic", "demoTopic")
            .key("demoClient")
            .send();
        System.out.println("Sent message to single device");
        
        // Publish a message to all MQTT devices subscribed to a topic
        producer.newMessage()

>             .property("clientID", "")

Reviewer 4: This is an invalid message :/

'The `clientID` property is set but has an empty value.'

Author: Correct, and it will be fixed when I paste the final version of the sample in here (you need to look at the PR in cumulocity-examples if you care about the code)

            .property("topic", "demoTopic")
            .key("demoTopic")
            .send();
        System.out.println("Sent message to all devices");
```

### Messaging Service quotas and limits {#messaging-service-quotas-limits}

Messages published to a Pulsar topic are stored persistently by the Messaging Service until they have been delivered to, and acknowledged by, all interested consumers.
For messages published to the `from-device` topic by the MQTT Service, the consumers are any clients that have created durable subscriptions on the topic.
For messages published to the `to-device` topic by clients, the consumers are the instances of the MQTT Service that will deliver the messages to devices.

To optimize resource usage, the Messaging Service imposes storage limits and a message time-to-live (TTL) on persistently stored messages.

> See the [service quotas](/service-terms/quotas/#mqtt-service) documentation for details on the default limits.

Reviewer: **question** - Will these actually be in place by the time we merge this doc? My understanding is that we've got an upcoming feature for this. Do we have pre-existing configurable quotas that are adequate?

Author: The ones discussed in this section (backlog limit and TTL) are already in place.

The backlog is shared by all subscriptions on a topic.
If the backlog quota limit is reached, no new messages can be added to the backlog until some older messages have been delivered, or deleted due to their TTL expiring.

If the backlog quota limit for the Pulsar `from-device` topic is reached, new MQTT `PUBLISH` packets from connected devices will be rejected.
If the `PUBLISH` packet was sent with QoS level 0, the message will be lost.
If the `PUBLISH` packet was sent with QoS level 1, the behaviour depends on the MQTT protocol version used by the device:
* For devices using MQTT version 3, the device will be disconnected.
* For devices using MQTT version 5, the device will receive a `PUBACK` packet with reason code `0x97`, _Quota exceeded_.

If the backlog quota limit for the Pulsar `to-device` topic is reached, clients calling the `Producer.send()` method, or its equivalent in the Pulsar library used by the client, will receive an appropriate exception or error response from the client library.

#### Message time-to-live

> Any undelivered messages will be automatically deleted if they have been on the backlog for longer than the _time to live (TTL) limit_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Any undelivered messages will be automatically deleted if they have been on the backlog for longer than the _time-to-live (TTL) limit_.
```

Subscribing a consumer to a Pulsar topic establishes a _durable subscription_ to the topic.
The Messaging Service will retain messages published to the topic until they have been acknowledged by all interested consumers, in order to provide "at least once" delivery guarantees.
The durable subscription will remain until it is explicitly deleted; that is, _it will not be removed simply because the client has disconnected from Pulsar._
Messages that are published while the client is disconnected will be available for it to consume when it reconnects.
This means that it is possible for a Pulsar topic to reach its backlog quota limit and stop accepting new messages even when no clients are running.
Therefore, as well as explicitly acknowledging every message, clients must also manage the lifecycle of any subscriptions they create:
1. Use the same subscription name every time the client connects a consumer.
   A common _anti-pattern_ is to generate a random subscription name each time the client runs.
   This will create a new subscription each time, but leave any previous subscriptions active with no consumers.

>    Eventually, the backlog quota limit for the topic will be reached, and no further messages will be deliver to the client.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Eventually, the backlog quota limit for the topic will be reached, and no further messages will be delivered to the client.
```

2. Transient errors in the Messaging Service.
   Errors in this category usually reflect a temporary issue with the Messaging Service server, that will be resolved either automatically or by administrator action.
   Some transient errors that a client may experience include:
   * Connections may be dropped when Messaging Service components are restarted during upgrades, or during unplanned outages of the Messaging Service.
     This will cause publish or consume operations to fail, and it may be necessary to re-connect, or re-establish the producer or consumer, before retrying the operation.
   * Published messages will be rejected when the backlog quota limit on the `to-device` topic has been reached.
     See [reliable delivery best practices](#reliable-delivery-best-practices) for advice on avoiding this situation.
   * Published messages may be rejected if other limits or quotas on the Messaging Service are reached.

If your client is using the Java client library, almost all errors will be reported as a `PulsarClientException` thrown by a client library method.

> In some very rare cases a `SchemaSerializationException` runtime error might also be thrown, if the client has not used the `Schema.BYTES` schema and byte array payloads exclusively.

Reviewer: This was something I was unaware of - I assumed that Pulsar was always bytes on the wire, and that the schema was purely about Java-level conversions. Does that mean that our example code using `Schema.STRING` is potentially dangerous?

Author: Honestly, I'm not 100% certain how it works either. But after some discussion with Rohit & Slawek on the other PR we changed everything to use `<byte[]>` and `Schema.BYTES` to be safe.

The `PulsarClientException` class has many sub-classes that allow a client to determine the cause of the error more precisely.
Other client libraries will have similar language-specific error reporting mechanisms.

In general, it is not possible to recover from a fatal configuration or logic error in the client implementation.
The client will need to be restarted after the error has been corrected.
For transient errors, a strategy of retrying after a delay is usually appropriate.

> When an operation on a producer or a consumer has failed, we recommend deleting the failed producer or consumer object and creating a new one before retrying the operation.

Reviewer: There's a good chance that I'm a bit confused, but it sounds like a _lot_ of this is handled under the hood - see the first paragraph of https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/4.1.x/concepts-clients/ . So we don't want to be putting client authors to unnecessary effort.

Author: You may be right on the consumer side - someone with more experience than me will know better. But I do know that we do exactly what I'm suggesting in the core for producers as we've seen them get "stuck" and refuse to reconnect after earlier failures. It's probably overkill to always throw it away and create a new one, but it's a rare event and it should always work (eventually). I'd much rather the client authors put in some unnecessary effort than that they open a support ticket that we have to debug, TBH.

Author: @rohitjoshi-c8y Do you have any thoughts on this? I really don't know if we need to be as aggressive about replacing "dead" consumer objects as we have been with producers.

Reviewer 4: FWIW in Apama I never recreate a consumer or producer that may have failed to receive/produce. If either fail to create then I would retry until they do, but once initial connection is established I never delete them even on a fail to receive/produce. 
Certainly Apama tests that if a connection drops then on next attempt to receive the consumer is able to automatically re-establish the connection.
Also Apama is a c++ client which may differ slightly so your mileage may vary. 

I am not sure we care that we recommend the most efficient approach though, so belt and braces of destroy and create is probably a ok recommendation. The dev can use some brain/gpt power to make it more intelligent.

Author: I may well be describing a bug in the Java client library here! Although if it is, it's one that has persisted through many upgrades of the library. Anyway, I can try to make this a bit less scary... any suggestions on how to re-word it?

Reviewer 4: 'When an operation on a producer or a consumer has failed, we recommend deleting the failed producer or consumer object and creating a new one before retrying the operation.'
\>\>\>
'When an operation on a producer or a consumer has failed, the error given may not be the easiest to identify a root cause, for a simple approach that would cover various scenarios, we would recommend deleting the failed producer or consumer object and creating a new one before retrying the operation, this should help to either identify the error at the earliest point or this may be enough to correct an underlying issue with those objects'

Maybe too wordy?

Author: Maybe a bit wordy, but it inspired me. Hopefully this is acceptable to everyone: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/e9578b8ee365e081c325934e4ea5a90b7f5e74f1

We also recommend an [exponential backoff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_backoff) strategy to increase the delay between repeated retries, until the service has fully recovered.

### Example client

> A complete example client based on the code snippets above can be found in the [cumulocity-examples](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/cumulocity-examples/mqtt-service/simple-pulsar-client) repository.

Reviewer 4: Just to confirm as I thought this may go live tomorrow, this example does not exist yet right? (link does not work)

Author: Correct again! The PR is approved and I just want to test it against an environment with the tenant isolation changes before I merge it.

</p>

{{< c8y-admon-info >}}
An _MQTT Service messaging client_ is a software component that interacts with the MQTT Service through Pulsar.
It can be deployed as a microservice hosted by the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform, or as part of an external application hosted outside the platform.
This documentation refers to such a component simply as a _client_.
If the implementation or behaviour differs depending on where the client is hosted, those differences are documented where relevant.
{{< /c8y-admon-info>}}

The MQTT Service implements _device isolation_, meaning that MQTT devices connected to the MQTT Service **cannot** communicate directly with each other using the MQTT protocol.
All inter-device communication must be managed explicitly by the client, as shown in the diagram.

This documentation does not cover the publish-subscribe messaging concepts and architecture implemented by Pulsar, nor any features of the Pulsar client libraries beyond those needed to implement a simple MQTT Service client.
To learn more about those subjects, refer to the [Pulsar product documentation](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/4.0.x/).

> ### Connecting to the Messaging Service

Reviewer 5: Please add the heading IDs throughout this file consistently.

Author: Done (hopefully I didn't miss any): https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/bba50039195eac243f108f0963bfee8ffe25e327

The client will need to be restarted after the error has been corrected.
For transient errors, a strategy of retrying after a delay is usually appropriate.
When an operation on a producer or a consumer has failed, it may be difficult to identify the exact root cause and the optimal response.
A simple recovery approach that covers most scenarios is to delete the failed producer or consumer and create a new one before retrying the operation.
This avoids cases where the producer or consumer cannot reconnect after an error.
A more sophisticated strategy can tailor the response to the specific subclass of `PulsarClientException` thrown.
Use an [exponential backoff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_backoff) strategy to increase the delay between retries until the service recovers.

### Example client

A complete [example Java client](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/mqtt-service/java-simple-pulsar-client) based on the code snippets above can be found in the [cumulocity-examples](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/mqtt-service) repository.

> The `README.md` file provided with the example explains how to build and run it.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The *README.md* file provided with the example explains how to build and run it.
```

The examples repository also contains a simple [Python MQTT client](https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/cumulocity-examples/tree/develop/mqtt-service/python-simple-mqtt-client) that can be used to simulate an MQTT device and test the operation of the Java client.

> See the `README.md` file included with the example for more details.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
See the *README.md* file included with the example for more details.
```

        final String tenantID = args[0];
        final String username = args[1];
        final String password = new String(System.console().readPassword("Password for user %s/%s: ", tenantID, username));

        // Create the basic authentication credentials object.
        final AuthenticationBasic basicAuth = new AuthenticationBasic();
        basicAuth.configure(MessageFormat.format("'{'\"userId\":\"{0}/{1}\",\"password\":\"{2}\"'}'", tenantID, username, password));

        // Create a Pulsar client using the basic authentication credentials.
        // The client will *not* try to connect and authenticate immediately.
        final PulsarClient client = PulsarClient.builder()
            .serviceUrl(pulsarUrl)
            .authentication(basicAuth)
            .build();
        System.out.println("Created Pulsar client");

        // The rest of the example will go here...
    }
}
```

### Message payloads and properties

Pulsar messages consist of a _payload_ and set of _properties_.

The payload is a sequence of zero or more bytes, identical to the payload of the MQTT `PUBLISH` message that the Pulsar message corresponds to.

> It is the client's responsiblity to understand the format of the payloads produced and accepted by the MQTT devices it communicates with.

Author: Fixed as part of https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/5e1863a8b8a530dd220b123a64f8a58dd587e898

            final Producer<byte[]> producer = client.newProducer(Schema.BYTES)
                .topic(MessageFormat.format("persistent://{0}/mqtt/to-device", tenantID))
                .create();
            System.out.println("Created Pulsar producer");

            // Publish a message to a single MQTT device.
            producer.newMessage()
                .property("clientID", "demoClient")
                .property("topic", "demoTopicB")
                .key("demoClient")
                .value("Message sent to a single device".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8))
                .send();
            System.out.println("Sent message to single device");

            // Publish a message to all MQTT devices subscribed to a topic.
            // Note that the "clientID" property is omitted here.
            producer.newMessage()
                .property("topic", "demoTopicB")
                .key("demoTopicB")
                .value("Message sent to all subscribed devices".getBytes(StandardCharsets.UTF_8))
                .send();
            System.out.println("Sent message to all subscribed devices");

>             // Pause for a minute to allow some test messages to be consumed.
>             Thread.sleep(60 * 1000);

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

I don't think doc code should have sleeps.

---
weight: 30
layout: redirect
title: Connecting microservices and applications

> ---

Reviewer 2: **_thought:_** Could a simple architecture diagram showing how these components fit together help? Maybe too much to ask for now, and perhaps we can come back to it later.

Author: I was thinking about updating the diagrams we already have in the intro section of the doc. I guess I might be inspired to copy parts of those into the later sections and add more detail.

Microservices and external applications can connect to the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} Messaging Service to receive messages from devices connected to the MQTT Service, and send messages to those devices.
The Messaging Service is a modified deployment of Apache Pulsar, and your applications will use the Pulsar client protocol directly to connect to it.

> ### Connecting to the Messaging Service

Reviewer 2: **_question:_** Would adding a short introduction to the usage of the Pulsar client, consumer, and producer to help familiarise the reader—preferably with a code snippet — be a good idea? After that, we can follow up with usage examples for the MQTT Service, like you have done.

Author: I don't know, I feel like that would be repeating material that is already in the Pulsar documentation. I did plan to have code snippets showing how to create a client, consumer & producer (and publish a message to the producer). If you stick all those together you have a trivial client example.

Author: I added a link to the Pulsar docs to the introduction - making it clear that you should read this to understand the basics of pub/sub messaging and how to use Pulsar. This doc only covers what you need to know to build a simple client. https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/68a87cbc33d7dde3fce15d6c47dbc354b2ef478b

> ### Connecting to the Messaging Service

Reviewer 2: **_nitpick:_** A quick prerequisites section helps perhaps?

Author: Yes, good thought. What would you have as pre-requisites?

Reviewer 2: These points are already described later (tenant access, Pulsar client library, credentials/roles, URL), but grouping them up front helps readers know what they need before diving in.

Author: Hopefully this is what you had in mind? https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/39cf92da425c0976673cb8609ab568a02215e19c

* You will use a Pulsar client to connect to the Messaging Service
* Various client libraries are available for a wide range of programming languages
* The example code in this document will use the Java client
<p>

* Connecting to Pulsar requires a URL and valid credentials
* For microservices, use the URL given to the microservice in the `C8Y_PULSAR_URL` environment variable

> * For external applications, use `pulsar://<domain>:6651` (this endpoint uses TLS, client certificates not currently supported)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For external applications, use `pulsar+ssl://<domain>:6651` (this endpoint uses TLS, client certificates not currently supported)
```

Author: Oops! Yes will certainly fix this.

* To authenticate a connection to Pulsar, currently only basic authentication is supported
* Microservices should use the credentials of the per-tenant service use (link to MS SDK docs)
* External applications can use the credentials of any tenant user with the appropriate roles
<p>

* Connections will be authorized to access only the Pulsar topics used by the MQTT Service, further controlled by roles

> * To consume messages from MQTT devices, the authenticated user must have `READ` permission on the `MQTT_SERVICE_MESSAGING_TOPICS` role

Reviewer 2: **_throught:_** For MS manifests, it may be useful to show the full enum name (e.g., `MQTT_SERVICE_MESSAGING_TOPICS_READ`) since they will need that.

Author: I was planning to show a snippet from a sample MS manifest that would have the full name - would that be OK?

* To publish messages to MQTT devices, the authenticated user must have `UPDATE` permission on the `MQTT_SERVICE_MESSAGING_TOPICS` role
* For microservices, these permissions should be configured in the microservice manifest, and they will be applied to the service user

> * For external applications, these permissions should be configured on the authenticated user through the Administration application

Reviewer 2: **_question:_** Should we also highlight other security features, such as tenant isolation?

Author: That feels like something we would have already mentioned in the introduction section.

Author: Added a line about device isolation to the introduction, and it is mentioned again in the publishing section. https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/9ad07568be5573d4f3cbead38f28b4a171ad06b6

* Messages received from MQTT devices will not contain any properties other than those listed
* Only the properties listed will be recognised when publishing messages to MQTT devices, all other will be ignored

### Consuming messages from MQTT devices

* All messages from MQTT devices are delivered on a single Pulsar topic, `persistent://<tenant>/mqtt/from-device`
* The id of the device that published the message, and the topic it was published to, can be obtained from the message properties
* This means that you must consume every message published by every device, even those you are not interested in (these can be acknowledged without further processing)
* To consume from the topic, create a Pulsar Consumer and subscribe it to the topic
* The consumer should register a MessageListener that will be called when a new message arrives on the topic
* After processing the message, it must be acknowledged (or acknowledge it immediately if no processing is required)
<p>

* Code snippet showing how to consume

### Publishing messages to MQTT devices

* All messages to MQTT devices are published on a single Pulsar topic, `persistent://<tenant>/mqtt/to-device`

> * The topic to publish to must be set using the `topic` message property

Reviewer 4: AND I love these two protocols. 
```suggestion
* The MQTT topic to publish to must be set using the `topic` message property
```

The topic message property, not to be confused with the Producer topic setting. 😄

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The topic to publish to must be set using the `channel` message property
```

* Because MQTT Service devices are isolated from each other, it is also necessary to set the `clientid` property to the id of the target device
* However, if you want to publish the message to all devices that are subscribed to the named topic, leave the `clientid` property empty (or missing?)
* To publish to the topic, create a Pulsar Producer, and construct Pulsar Messages with the appropriate properties and payload
<p>

* Code snippet showing how to publish

> 

Reviewer 2: **_issue/suggestion:_** It might be useful to add a section on error handling so readers know how to deal with common error scenarios.

Author: Yes, that's another good idea. Not sure what I would put in it exactly... probably I should try to remember all the ways I mess up in writing some example code.

Author: I added some thoughts on this subject: https://github.com/Cumulocity-IoT/c8y-docs/pull/3642/commits/69e7aed1bf0c916c352919f0fc1478b7ffb044b3.

Let me know what you think, with your greater knowledge of the Pulsar client library. For example I know we generally throw away a `Producer` after any failure to publish, but is this also the right advice for a `Consumer`, or does it generally re-connect automatically?

* Therefore, to ensure timely and uninterrupted message delivery, it is important to process and acknowledge each messages as quickly as possible
* On the other hand, don't acknowledge too soon as acknowledged messages will not be re-delivered even after a failure and restart of the client
<p>

* Subscribing a consumer creates a persistent subscription on the topic
* The subscription will retain messages even when the consumer is disconnected, so that messages will not be lost because of e.g. microservice restarts
* This means you can reach the backlog quota on the topic even while your client is not running
* If you want to stop retaining messages, the subscription must be explicitly deleted - and it may be necessary to do this manually
* Use the same subscription name every time the microservice runs; do not use random names and create a new subscription every time
* The M&M capability may be useful to see what subscriptions your tenant has on the MQTT Service topics, and to clear full backlogs if required
<p>

* Code snippet showing how to shut down cleanly

> 

Reviewer 2: **_throught:_** Would it be helpful to include a short “common pitfalls” list (e.g., forgetting to acknowledge messages -> backlog quota filled)?

Author: That is really what this "best practices" section was supposed to be, and I think I already mentioned the consequences of not acknowledging a few lines up from here. It should be clearer when all these bullets are turned into actual prose.
